# Termina

Termina is a domain-specific language for real-time embedded systems aimed at simplifying their implementation and reducing validation and verification costs.

This repository contains the implementation of a transpiler from Termina to C. The generated code is supported on a [runtime](https://github.com/termina-lang/termina-runtime) that in turn runs on a real-time operating system. 

## Main features

Termina adheres to the following core principles:

- **Ease of learning and use**. Termina follows the imperative paradigm with a syntax similar to C to facilitate adoption by current developers.
- **Domain-specific abstractions**. The language includes abstractions pertinent to reactive critical real-time systems, such as events, tasks, and asynchronous handlers, aligning design models with final application code.
- **Reactive programming model**. Tasks and handlers in Termina will be reactive components, incorporating various response actions. The language will enable global event definition and association with component actions, enhancing application analysis and verification.
- **_Run-to-completion_ semantics**. Actions in the system always complete once started, without blocking their executing tasks. This approach requires **all functions to be terminating**, with bounded loops and no recursion, aiding verification procedures.
- **Design patterns for safety and robustness**. Termina supports only two interaction mechanisms between reactive elements: shared resources and asynchronous message passing. A monitor-based approach manages shared resources.
- **Deterministic dynamic memory management**. Termina only allows the use of memory pools as a dynamic memory management mechanism.
- **Provision of memory-safety properties**. Termina implements a type system that guarantees that no error arises from memory management. In particular, the absence of access errors, null-pointer de-references and memory leaks.

## Installation instructions

The Termina to C transpiler is still in an early stage of development. Therefore, binary releases are not available. The only way is to compile the project from source. To do this, it is first necessary to install the Stack tool. The Stack installation instructions can be found through this [link](https://docs.haskellstack.org/en/stable/install_and_upgrade/).

Once Stack is installed and the repository is cloned, it is necessary to execute the following commands from the terminal:

```bash
$ stack init
$ stack install
```

The first one will initialize the repository and generate the configuration files needed to compile the project. The second one allows you to compile the project and install the binary in a specific directory so that it is accessible for execution.

In order to execute the code generated by the transpiler, it is necessary to install the Termina runtime found in this [repository](https://github.com/termina-lang/termina-runtime).

## Documentation

The main source of project documentation is the [Termina book](https://termina-lang.github.io/termina-book/).

## Status

The current status of the project is as follows:

- The project is still in a preliminary phase. The transpiler is able to generate C code for different platforms. This code is supported by a Termina runtime that can be found in its repository.
- The transpiler incorporates a type checker and a fully functional semantic parser capable of detecting errors and generating meaningful error messages.
- The transpiler implements a simple Language Server Protocol (LSP) server that can be used by different integrated development environments.

## Future features

The following features are under development and are not yet present or available to the application developer:

- Runtime error checking and detection. At the moment, the transpiler allows detecting a number of errors at compile time thanks to its type system and the semantic analyzer, but there are other errors such as, for example, the indexing of arrays out of order, or the occurrence of overflows and underflows in arithmetic operations, whose detection is performed at runtime. The detection of these errors is not yet performed.
- Support for system calls. The incorporation of a mechanism that allows the execution of system calls in the form of procedures that allow, among other things, the obtaining of different parameters such as, for example, the time elapsed since the system boot, is foreseen.
- Generic programming. The language implements a small number of parametric types for memory management and inter-task communication, but there is no flexible mechanism to allow generic programming.
- Implementation of support for other real-time operating systems. The Termina runtime, available in this repository, supports a small number of platforms. It is planned to incorporate new platforms in the near future.

## Contribute

If you are interested in collaborating with us and would like more information, please contact us at the following e-mail address: team@termina-lang.org.
